Message-ID: <31128156.1075863386494.JavaMail.evans@thyme>
Date: Sun, 16 Jan 2001 19:03:01 -0700 (PDT)
From: ethink@enron.com
Subject: Assessing the influence of harvesting intensities on structural diversity of forests in south-west Germany
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-From: ethink </O=ENRON/OU=NA/CN=RECIPIENTS/CN=NOTESADDR/CN=ETHINK>
X-To: All Enron Worldwide@ENRON <??SAll Enron Worldwide@ENRON>
X-cc: 
X-bcc: 
X-Folder: \RBENSON (Non-Privileged)\Benson, Robert\Inbox
X-Origin: Benson-R
X-FileName: RBENSON (Non-Privileged).pst


A major challenge for modern forestry is the integration of wood production with other important values such as the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning (e.g. McDermott et al. 2010). Forest management changes the structure and composition of forests (e.g. Lindenmayer et al. 2000; Parrotta et al. 2002; Kuuluvainen 2009) and there is a general concern that forest biodiversity and ecosystem functioning are negatively impacted by increasing harvesting intensity (Raison et al. 2001; Bauhus et al. 2017a; Urli et al. 2017). It has been shown that the difference in key structural elements and composition between managed and natural forests (including naturally disturbed forests) increases with increasing harvesting intensity (e.g. Parrotta et al. 2002; de Avila et al. 2015; Urli et al. 2017). Yet, in many studies on the impact of forest management, the intensity of harvesting is actually not considered but comparisons are being made between unharvested or reserved and (recently) harvested forests (e.g. Gilliam 2002; Okland et al. 2003; Paillet et al. 2010). However, this approach has one important limitation. While the status of unharvested forest reserves can be reasonably well described and defined, harvested forests can cover a wide range of harvesting intensities, ranging from clearfelling to single tree selection. Hence, these simple comparisons between unharvested and harvested forests provide little information on the influence of harvesting intensity on forest structure and biodiversity (Fig. 1). 

While there have been some studies that explicitly considered the influence of harvesting intensity or forest use intensity as a continuous variable, these typically focused on selected aspects of forest biodiversity such structural variables, tree diversity, forest understorey or particular taxonomic groups or were spatially restricted to small areas or regions (e.g. Fredericksen et al. 1999; Parrotta et al. 2002; González-Alday et al. 2008; Sullivan et al. 2008; Michel and Winter 2009; de Avila et al. 2015). Depending on the respective focus of these studies, impacts of harvesting intensity ranged from positive (e.g. for the diversity of forest understorey plant communities or tree species richness (Kern et al. 2006)) to negative (e.g. volume or dimension of downed deadwood and species depending on large dimensioned trees and dead wood (e.g. Müller et al. 2008; Gossner et al. 2013). The lack of broad-scale assessments of the relationship between harvesting intensity and biodiversity or biodiversity surrogates limits the generalization of these findings for larger areas (Gilliam 2002; Roberts and Zhu 2002; Vandekerkhove et al. 2016).

Management of semi-natural forests, in particular on public land, increasingly aims at maintaining or increasing compositional and structural diversity for a number of reasons (e.g. Franklin et al. 2002; Puettmann et al. 2015). Structurally and compositionally diverse forests may have a higher ecological stability than monocultures or one-layered stands in relation to biotic and abiotic stress and disturbances (Neuner et al. 2015; Thurm et al. 2016; Penone et al. 2019). According to the habitat heterogeneity hypothesis, the provision of many different niches and structural elements in diverse forests is assumed to support also a higher species richness (Simpson 1949; Tews et al. 2004; Jung et al. 2012). At the stand scale, this can be achieved, for example, by implementing management strategies such as ‘retention forestry’, where the intentional protection and development of forest structural elements across harvesting cycles can maintain habitats and organisms (Abrahamsson and Lindbladh 2006; Bauhus et al. 2009; Gustafsson et al. 2012). At the landscape scale, higher species richness may be achieved with increased beta-diversity through increasing variation among patches owing to differences in management or successional status (e.g. Hilmers et al. 2018; Schall et al. 2018a).

One of the major challenges in the assessment of forest harvesting intensity on biodiversity is that it is not possible to monitor biodiversity in all forests directly. Presence or diversity of species from different taxonomic groups can commonly be sampled only in case studies and for small areas (e.g. Laiolo 2002; Glaser 2006), which likely provides an incomplete and potentially unrepresentative picture. Therefore, the presence and the expression of different structural elements of forests have been suggested as surrogates for information about the abundance and richness of forest-dwelling species (e.g. McElhinny et al. 2006a; Jung et al. 2012). By analysing changes in structural diversity of forests, possible changes in communities of forest-dwelling species may be assessed too. Here we aim at assessing impacts on forest harvesting intensity based on large-scale forest inventory data. National forest inventory (NFI) data of Baden-Württemberg were used to include all different types of forests and an inventory period of 10?years to analyse these impacts in a comprehensive and representative way across the whole forest area and for a broad range of harvesting intensities from unharvested forest stands to clear-fellings.

Previous studies like those of Kahl and Bauhus (2014) or Schall and Ammer (2013) developed approaches to quantify forest management intensity along a continuum of human interference. For example, the index of forest management intensity (FORMI) developed by Kahl and Bauhus (2014) includes three criteria, the proportion of the total tree volume that has recently been harvested, the proportion of cultivated tree species that are not part of the natural forest community, and the proportion of the total dead wood volume that has originated from management activities. In other approaches that used a set of variables to describe management intensity by the level of naturalness (Bartha 2004; Winter et al. 2010), it is difficult to distinguish between independent and dependent variables. These types of approaches have been typically applied to relatively small areas, where detailed information about the necessary variables could be collected. If the influence of harvesting intensity on forest biodiversity is to be assessed on a large scale, it may be determined more directly on the basis of inventory data.

Here, we used harvesting intensity calculated on the basis of NFI data as the main predictor variable to analyse changes in structural diversity of forests over large areas. Based on data of the German National Forest Inventory for the state of Baden-Württemberg (SW-Germany, NFI2002 and NFI2012), an index has been developed to assess the level of structural diversity of forests comprehensively (Storch et al. 2018). This index (‘FSI’ - Forest Structure Index) combines many forest attributes that cover important habitat components of forest dwelling species; see 2.2. Results showed an increase of structural diversity (FSI-score) for most of the analysed types of forests in Baden-Württemberg (Storch et al. 2018).

We employed this index for our analysis because a) it describes structural diversity of forests in an objective manner b) it can be applied to large forest areas and to the whole range for forest types and site conditions and c) it can be directly related to harvesting intensity that is quantified for the same set of inventory plots. Thus, the influence of harvesting intensity on changes of structural diversity in different forest types can be assessed for the period between the two national inventories from 2002 and 2012 (NFI2002 – NFI2012).

Our hypothesis was that increasing harvesting intensity leads to a decrease in structural diversity of forests (e.g. Parrotta et al. 2002; Hartsough 2003; Cazzolla Gatti et al. 2015; Urli et al. 2017). However, no hypothesis was formulated regarding the shape of this relationship, i.e. whether the decrease followed a linear or non-linear function or at which harvesting intensity structural diversity of forests starts to decrease.